.TH PAM-DEVICE-AUTH 8 "2026-03-28" "0.3.4" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
pam-device-auth \- SSH authentication via OIDC Device Authorization Grant
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pam-device-auth
[\fB\-\-check\fR]
[\fB\-\-enable\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-\-help\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pam-device-auth
is a PAM module and Go binary that authenticates SSH users via the OIDC
Device Authorization Grant (RFC 8628). Users see a URL and code in their
terminal, authorize in a browser, and the SSH session is granted.
.PP
The Go binary is invoked by the C PAM module
.RB ( pam_device_auth.so )
during SSH keyboard-interactive authentication. It is not typically run
directly by users, except for the
.B \-\-check
and
.B \-\-enable
commands.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-check
Validate the configuration file and test OIDC provider connectivity.
Exits with 0 on success, 1 on failure.
.TP
.B \-\-enable
Activate PAM authentication. Backs up
.IR /etc/pam.d/sshd ,
installs the PAM config, and restarts sshd. Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable verbose logging to
.IR /var/log/pam-device-auth.log .
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration file:
.IR /etc/pam-device-auth/config.json .
.PP
.TS
l l l l.
Field	Required	Default	Description
_
issuer_url	Yes	\-	OIDC issuer URL
client_id	Yes	\-	OAuth2 client ID (public)
required_role	Yes	\-	Role claim value for SSH access
sudo_role	No	\-	Role for admin group membership
role_claim	No	realm_access.roles	JWT claim key for roles
auth_timeout	No	180	Device flow timeout (30\-600s)
create_user	No	true	Create local user on first login
user_groups	No	["sudo"]	Groups for normal users
admin_groups	No	\-	Groups for sudo_role users
force_password_change	No	true	Require password change on first login
show_qr	No	auto	QR display: true/false/auto-detect
ip_claim	No	\-	JWT claim with allowed IPs/CIDRs
.TE
.PP
Every field can be overridden via environment variables prefixed with
.BR PAM_DEVICE_AUTH_ .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/pam-device-auth/config.json
OIDC provider configuration.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/security/pam_device_auth.so
C PAM shared library.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/pam-device-auth
Go binary.
.TP
.I /run/pam-device-auth/
Token cache directory (tmpfs, cleared on reboot). Mode 0700 root:root.
.TP
.I /var/log/pam-device-auth.log
Authentication log file.
.TP
.I /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/10-pam-device-auth.conf
sshd configuration (LogLevel DEBUG1, KbdInteractiveAuthentication yes).
.SH AUTHENTICATION FLOW
.PP
.B First login
(new user or new IP): OIDC Device Authorization Grant. User sees URL + code
(+ QR code if client supports UTF-8). Authorizes in browser. User is created
with a temporary password. Session disconnects.
.PP
.B Second login:
User enters temporary password. Prompted to set a permanent password.
.PP
.B Subsequent logins
(same IP): Local password + OIDC token refresh (fast path, no browser).
.PP
.B New IP:
Full device authorization required again.
.SH SECURITY
.PP
IP-bound sessions, JWT algorithm/key-type binding, OIDC endpoint HTTPS
enforcement, KnownIPs capped at 20 (FIFO), shadow TOCTOU elimination,
crypt_r(3) password verification, fork/exec (no shell), single password
prompt per session, SIGPIPE handling, waitpid timeout, log sanitization.
.PP
See
.I SECURITY.md
in the source repository for the full threat model.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.PP
Ubuntu 24.04+ or Debian 13+. OpenSSH >= 9.6p1.
.B LogLevel DEBUG1
in sshd_config is required for SSH client auto-detection (QR code display).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pam (8),
.BR sshd (8),
.BR sshd_config (5),
.BR pam.conf (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Norbert Krucky <nk@dev.nk-it.cloud>
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/NK-IT-CLOUD/pam-device-auth/issues.
.PP
Security vulnerabilities: email nk@dev.nk-it.cloud (do not open public issues).
